CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Salesforce Flow & DevOps Skills

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to this project.

## 🌟 Ways to Contribute

- 🐛 Report bugs and issues
- 💡 Suggest new features or enhancements
- 📝 Improve documentation
- 🔧 Fix bugs or implement features
- ✅ Add tests and validation
- 🎨 Improve skill prompts and workflows

## 🚀 Getting Started

### 1. Fork and Clone

```bash
# Fork the repository on GitHub, then:
git clone https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills.git
cd claude-code-salesforce-skills
```

### 2. Install for Development

```bash
# Install skills locally for testing
./install.sh --local

# Or install globally
./install.sh --global
```

### 3. Create a Branch

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
# or
git checkout -b fix/bug-description
```

## 📝 Making Changes

### Skill Development Guidelines

1. **Follow Existing Structure**: Maintain consistency with existing skills
2. **Update SKILL.md**: Keep YAML frontmatter accurate
3. **Document Changes**: Update README and inline documentation
4. **Test Thoroughly**: Test with real Salesforce orgs if applicable
5. **Validate**: Run validation scripts before committing

### Validation Checklist

Before submitting changes:

```bash
# Validate all skills
cd skills/skill-builder/scripts
python3 bulk_validate.py

# Check specific skill
python3 validate_yaml.py path/to/SKILL.md

# Check dependencies
python3 dependency_manager.py validate --all
```

### Code Style

- **YAML**: Use 2 spaces for indentation
- **Markdown**: Follow standard markdown formatting
- **Bash Scripts**: Follow Google Shell Style Guide
- **Python**: Follow PEP 8

### Skill Frontmatter Standards

All skills must have valid YAML frontmatter:

```yaml
---
name: skill-name              # Required: kebab-case
description: One line summary # Required: Clear description
version: X.Y.Z               # Required: Semantic versioning
author: Your Name            # Recommended
license: MIT                 # Required
tags:                        # Recommended
  - category
  - purpose
allowed-tools:              # Required
  - Bash
  - Read
  # ... (only tools you use)
dependencies:               # Optional
  - name: dependency-skill
    version: ">=1.0.0"
    required: true
metadata:                   # Recommended
  format_version: "2.0.0"
  created: "YYYY-MM-DD"
  updated: "YYYY-MM-DD"
---
```

## 🧪 Testing

### Manual Testing

1. **Install Updated Skill**: Use install/upgrade scripts
2. **Restart Claude Code**: Load the modified skill
3. **Test Workflows**: Execute typical use cases
4. **Verify Output**: Ensure correct behavior
5. **Test Edge Cases**: Try unusual inputs

### Salesforce-Specific Testing

For sf-deployment and sf-flow-builder:

1. Test with multiple Salesforce orgs (sandbox, scratch orgs)
2. Verify CLI command execution
3. Test error handling with invalid metadata
4. Validate flow XML structure and deployment

## 📊 Commit Guidelines

### Commit Message Format

```
<type>(<scope>): <subject>

<body>

<footer>
```

**Types**:
- `feat`: New feature
- `fix`: Bug fix
- `docs`: Documentation changes
- `style`: Code style changes (formatting, no logic change)
- `refactor`: Code refactoring
- `test`: Adding or updating tests
- `chore`: Maintenance tasks

**Examples**:

```
feat(sf-flow-builder): Add Platform Event flow template

- Added new template for platform event-triggered flows
- Updated documentation with usage examples
- Validated with API 62.0

Closes #123
```

```
fix(sf-deployment): Fix dry-run flag in validation

- Changed --check-only to --dry-run for sf CLI v2
- Updated documentation to reflect modern CLI
- Tested with sf CLI 2.15.0

Fixes #456
```

## 🔀 Pull Request Process

### 1. Ensure Quality

- [ ] All validation scripts pass
- [ ] Documentation is updated
- [ ] CHANGELOG.md is updated (for features/fixes)
- [ ] Version numbers bumped appropriately (if applicable)
- [ ] Commits follow commit message format

### 2. Submit Pull Request

1. Push your branch to your fork
2. Open a Pull Request against `main` branch
3. Fill out the PR template completely
4. Link related issues

### 3. PR Template

```markdown
## Description
Brief description of changes

## Type of Change
- [ ] Bug fix
- [ ] New feature
- [ ] Documentation update
- [ ] Refactoring
- [ ] Other (describe)

## Testing
Describe testing performed

## Checklist
- [ ] Validated with bulk_validate.py
- [ ] Updated documentation
- [ ] Updated CHANGELOG.md
- [ ] Tested manually
- [ ] No breaking changes (or documented)

## Related Issues
Closes #XXX
```

### 4. Code Review

- Respond to reviewer feedback promptly
- Make requested changes
- Re-request review after updates

## 🐛 Reporting Bugs

### Bug Report Template

```markdown
**Describe the bug**
Clear description of the issue

**To Reproduce**
Steps to reproduce:
1. Install skill...
2. Run command...
3. Observe error...

**Expected behavior**
What should happen

**Actual behavior**
What actually happened

**Environment**
- Claude Code version:
- Skill version:
- OS:
- Salesforce CLI version (if applicable):

**Logs/Screenshots**
Include relevant logs or screenshots

**Additional context**
Any other relevant information
```

## 💡 Suggesting Features

### Feature Request Template

```markdown
**Is your feature request related to a problem?**
Description of the problem

**Describe the solution you'd like**
Clear description of desired functionality

**Describe alternatives you've considered**
Other approaches you've thought about

**Use cases**
How would this be used?

**Additional context**
Mockups, examples, related projects, etc.
```

## 📚 Documentation Guidelines

### What to Document

- New features and capabilities
- Breaking changes
- Configuration options
- Usage examples
- Troubleshooting steps

### Documentation Locations

- **README.md**: Overview, installation, quick start
- **SKILL.md**: Skill-specific detailed instructions
- **docs/**: Extended guides and tutorials
- **examples/**: Working examples
- **CHANGELOG.md**: Version history

## 🎯 Skill Versioning

Follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/):

- **MAJOR** (X.0.0): Breaking changes
- **MINOR** (0.X.0): New features (backwards-compatible)
- **PATCH** (0.0.X): Bug fixes (backwards-compatible)

### When to Bump Versions

```
MAJOR: Breaking API changes, required frontmatter changes
MINOR: New templates, new workflows, new commands
PATCH: Bug fixes, documentation updates, minor improvements
```

## 🔒 Security

### Reporting Security Issues

**Do NOT open public issues for security vulnerabilities.**

Email security concerns to: [YOUR_EMAIL]

Include:
- Description of vulnerability
- Steps to reproduce
- Potential impact
- Suggested fix (if any)

## 📜 Code of Conduct

### Our Pledge

We pledge to make participation in this project a harassment-free experience for everyone.

### Our Standards

**Positive behavior**:
- Using welcoming and inclusive language
- Being respectful of differing viewpoints
- Gracefully accepting constructive criticism
- Focusing on what's best for the community

**Unacceptable behavior**:
- Harassment, trolling, or insulting comments
- Public or private harassment
- Publishing private information
- Other conduct inappropriate in a professional setting

### Enforcement

Project maintainers will enforce these standards and may remove, edit, or reject contributions that violate this code of conduct.

## ❓ Questions?

- Open a [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills/discussions)
- Check existing [Issues](https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills/issues)
- Review the [README](README.md)

## 🙏 Recognition

Contributors will be acknowledged in:
- README.md Contributors section
- CHANGELOG.md for specific contributions
- GitHub Contributors page

Thank you for contributing! 🎉

Commit message:

1 feat: Convert to Anthropic plugin format for marketplace distribution    2    3 Major restructuring to enable /plugin install distribution:    4    5 ## New Plugin Infrastructure    6 - .claude-plugin/plugin.json - Plugin manifest with metadata    7 - hooks/hooks.json - PostToolUse hook configuration    8 - hooks/scripts/ - Validation hook scripts    9   10 ## Validation Hooks (automatic on Write)   11 - validate_flow.py - 110-point Flow scoring   12 - validate_apex.py - NEW 150-point Apex validator   13 - validate_skill.py - SKILL.md frontmatter validation   14 - post-write-validate.py - Hook orchestrator   15   16 ## Simplified SKILL.md Format   17 - Reduced frontmatter to name + description only   18 - Moved metadata (author, version, license) to plugin.json   19 - Updated path references to relative plugin paths   20   21 ## Documentation Updates   22 - README.md: New /plugin install instructions   23 - CONTRIBUTING.md: Updated for plugin workflow   24   25 Installation changes from:   26   git clone && ./scripts/install.sh   27 To:   28   /plugin install github:Jaganpro/sf-skills

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Salesforce Flow & DevOps Skills

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to this project.

## 🌟 Ways to Contribute

- 🐛 Report bugs and issues
- 💡 Suggest new features or enhancements
- 📝 Improve documentation
- 🔧 Fix bugs or implement features
- ✅ Add tests and validation
- 🎨 Improve skill prompts and workflows

## 🚀 Getting Started

### 1. Fork and Clone

```bash
# Fork the repository on GitHub, then:
git clone https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills.git
cd claude-code-salesforce-skills
```

### 2. Install for Development

```bash
# Install as a plugin for testing
/plugin install .

# Or use legacy script
./scripts/install.sh --local
```

### 3. Create a Branch

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
# or
git checkout -b fix/bug-description
```

## 📝 Making Changes

### Skill Development Guidelines

1. **Follow Existing Structure**: Maintain consistency with existing skills
2. **Update SKILL.md**: Keep YAML frontmatter accurate
3. **Document Changes**: Update README and inline documentation
4. **Test Thoroughly**: Test with real Salesforce orgs if applicable
5. **Validate**: Run validation scripts before committing

### Validation Checklist

Before submitting changes:

```bash
# Validate all skills
cd skills/skill-builder/scripts
python3 bulk_validate.py

# Check specific skill
python3 validate_yaml.py path/to/SKILL.md

# Check dependencies
python3 dependency_manager.py validate --all
```

### Code Style

- **YAML**: Use 2 spaces for indentation
- **Markdown**: Follow standard markdown formatting
- **Bash Scripts**: Follow Google Shell Style Guide
- **Python**: Follow PEP 8

### Skill Frontmatter Standards

Skills use simplified YAML frontmatter (Anthropic plugin format):

```yaml
---
name: skill-name              # Required: kebab-case
description: Clear description of what this skill does and when Claude should use it. Can be multiple sentences for detailed context.
---
```

**Note**: Metadata like `author`, `version`, `license` is now defined in `.claude-plugin/plugin.json` at the plugin level, not per-skill.

## 🧪 Testing

### Manual Testing

1. **Install Updated Skill**: Use install/upgrade scripts
2. **Restart Claude Code**: Load the modified skill
3. **Test Workflows**: Execute typical use cases
4. **Verify Output**: Ensure correct behavior
5. **Test Edge Cases**: Try unusual inputs

### Salesforce-Specific Testing

For sf-deployment and sf-flow-builder:

1. Test with multiple Salesforce orgs (sandbox, scratch orgs)
2. Verify CLI command execution
3. Test error handling with invalid metadata
4. Validate flow XML structure and deployment

## 📊 Commit Guidelines

### Commit Message Format

```
<type>(<scope>): <subject>

<body>

<footer>
```

**Types**:
- `feat`: New feature
- `fix`: Bug fix
- `docs`: Documentation changes
- `style`: Code style changes (formatting, no logic change)
- `refactor`: Code refactoring
- `test`: Adding or updating tests
- `chore`: Maintenance tasks

**Examples**:

```
feat(sf-flow-builder): Add Platform Event flow template

- Added new template for platform event-triggered flows
- Updated documentation with usage examples
- Validated with API 62.0

Closes #123
```

```
fix(sf-deployment): Fix dry-run flag in validation

- Changed --check-only to --dry-run for sf CLI v2
- Updated documentation to reflect modern CLI
- Tested with sf CLI 2.15.0

Fixes #456
```

## 🔀 Pull Request Process

### 1. Ensure Quality

- [ ] All validation scripts pass
- [ ] Documentation is updated
- [ ] CHANGELOG.md is updated (for features/fixes)
- [ ] Version numbers bumped appropriately (if applicable)
- [ ] Commits follow commit message format

### 2. Submit Pull Request

1. Push your branch to your fork
2. Open a Pull Request against `main` branch
3. Fill out the PR template completely
4. Link related issues

### 3. PR Template

```markdown
## Description
Brief description of changes

## Type of Change
- [ ] Bug fix
- [ ] New feature
- [ ] Documentation update
- [ ] Refactoring
- [ ] Other (describe)

## Testing
Describe testing performed

## Checklist
- [ ] Validated with bulk_validate.py
- [ ] Updated documentation
- [ ] Updated CHANGELOG.md
- [ ] Tested manually
- [ ] No breaking changes (or documented)

## Related Issues
Closes #XXX
```

### 4. Code Review

- Respond to reviewer feedback promptly
- Make requested changes
- Re-request review after updates

## 🐛 Reporting Bugs

### Bug Report Template

```markdown
**Describe the bug**
Clear description of the issue

**To Reproduce**
Steps to reproduce:
1. Install skill...
2. Run command...
3. Observe error...

**Expected behavior**
What should happen

**Actual behavior**
What actually happened

**Environment**
- Claude Code version:
- Skill version:
- OS:
- Salesforce CLI version (if applicable):

**Logs/Screenshots**
Include relevant logs or screenshots

**Additional context**
Any other relevant information
```

## 💡 Suggesting Features

### Feature Request Template

```markdown
**Is your feature request related to a problem?**
Description of the problem

**Describe the solution you'd like**
Clear description of desired functionality

**Describe alternatives you've considered**
Other approaches you've thought about

**Use cases**
How would this be used?

**Additional context**
Mockups, examples, related projects, etc.
```

## 📚 Documentation Guidelines

### What to Document

- New features and capabilities
- Breaking changes
- Configuration options
- Usage examples
- Troubleshooting steps

### Documentation Locations

- **README.md**: Overview, installation, quick start
- **SKILL.md**: Skill-specific detailed instructions
- **docs/**: Extended guides and tutorials
- **examples/**: Working examples
- **CHANGELOG.md**: Version history

## 🎯 Skill Versioning

Follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/):

- **MAJOR** (X.0.0): Breaking changes
- **MINOR** (0.X.0): New features (backwards-compatible)
- **PATCH** (0.0.X): Bug fixes (backwards-compatible)

### When to Bump Versions

```
MAJOR: Breaking API changes, required frontmatter changes
MINOR: New templates, new workflows, new commands
PATCH: Bug fixes, documentation updates, minor improvements
```

## 🔒 Security

### Reporting Security Issues

**Do NOT open public issues for security vulnerabilities.**

Email security concerns to: [YOUR_EMAIL]

Include:
- Description of vulnerability
- Steps to reproduce
- Potential impact
- Suggested fix (if any)

## 📜 Code of Conduct

### Our Pledge

We pledge to make participation in this project a harassment-free experience for everyone.

### Our Standards

**Positive behavior**:
- Using welcoming and inclusive language
- Being respectful of differing viewpoints
- Gracefully accepting constructive criticism
- Focusing on what's best for the community

**Unacceptable behavior**:
- Harassment, trolling, or insulting comments
- Public or private harassment
- Publishing private information
- Other conduct inappropriate in a professional setting

### Enforcement

Project maintainers will enforce these standards and may remove, edit, or reject contributions that violate this code of conduct.

## ❓ Questions?

- Open a [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills/discussions)
- Check existing [Issues](https://github.com/your-github-username/claude-code-salesforce-skills/issues)
- Review the [README](README.md)

## 🙏 Recognition

Contributors will be acknowledged in:
- README.md Contributors section
- CHANGELOG.md for specific contributions
- GitHub Contributors page

Thank you for contributing! 🎉
